---
title: I'll Take Door Number...?
kind: article
author_name: Katie Chapman
created_at: 2012-04-23
updated_at: 2012-04-23
published: false
tags:
  - Funding
  - Decisions
---

There are some things in life that are “worth it” and some things that are not.
We believe that the ideas we are promoting and working to make possible are
“worth it.” They are worth enough that we have essentially thrown all of our
time and finances to it for the last, ehem, unmentionably long time frame. We
feel entirely grateful for the generous support of friends and family in our
efforts, both in occasional and appreciated financial contributions, and even
more in the cheer squad effect and the brave willingness to watch our brood of
kids from time to time while we have tended to business matters. Without the
amazingly prolific support of our closest loved ones, we could have never
gotten to this point. But here we are, on the verge of releasing our first
product and offering an open source research platform for doing amazing
research and sharing it with the world. Life is amazing!

For those that are not aware, I am still a college student. Or I suppose a
more accurate statement would be that I am 'again' a college student. Chris
has been a student for the majority of the last decade and is still waiting to
get that final stamp of approval on his project for a long awaited masters
degree. Meanwhile we have five fantastic kids (pardon the blatant bias).
While conquering enough worlds to make many people squeamish, we decided to
build on a passion and a desire to make a difference, by creating Pentandra
Research---a business that openly works to build a solid research environment
for truly collaborative, in-depth research.

Now, lest you think us to be completely insane (which I am not completely sure
would be inaccurate---at least on some days), allow me to say that we have
started our own businesses previously during similarly complicated periods of
our life.  However, there is a difference this time that is both exhilarating
and exceptionally intimidating.  Funding.  What a difference that one word
makes.  Wow.  Before, we opened simple businesses that only had to support our
very bare bones financial requirements.  All of those businesses required very
minimal cash investments to get them up and running and next to zero capital to
run them after that.  Other than some minor advertising or minimal tools or
supplies, there were essentially no financial requirements for the businesses
themselves.  Not so this time.

I could ramble about all of the various financial requirements of this
business, from Internet web hosting costs to legal expenses, but I honestly
don't want to bore you that badly.  The biggest difference for us is that we
feel compelled by the timing of this venture.  Now, right now, is the time to
bring this all into reality.  We need to be able to find ways to manage to
survive as a family, but we need other people involved and have to provide for
their families too.  That is a huge ol' difference and it goes beyond our bank
account's ability to handle.  We are so grateful to have been able to bank roll
things along this far, but we recognize that the time has come to reach out.
We have to get Geungle up on the cloud, not just running from our local servers
anymore.  We have to be able to achieve enough funding that we can honestly
tell those that trust us to care for their data, that we will be around to
continue to service those needs.  We don't want to get into this just far
enough to have people starting to experience fully open and rich research and
then have to devote our time to some other job to pay the bills, while there is
no support or improvements in our research platform.  We also can't ask others
to give up their “day job” to help us start to move things full speed ahead if
we do not have the bank roll to see it through.

While I am sure some of you are either shocked or even disturbed at my candor,
I would rather have your eyes open to our reality, than protect my own ego or
some sense of corporate detachment when it comes to finances.  We really are
open, just like our Open Business page says, and figure that the best people to
help us cover the needs of this business are the ones we want to offer it to.
Researchers that want better ways to manage their research, share it, and get
feedback on it are our best allies.  We contemplated the “Who do we know that
could hook us up with some cash for getting this thing off the ground?”
question many times.  Unfortunately, we don't run in circles that have tons of
investing power and the circles we are closest too are already helping in all
kinds of ways and can't give much else.  I am not writing this blog article to
beg for money from any particular reader, but to use all possible readers as a
spring board for our financing ideas.  I would love to hear back from any of
you that have tread the start-up financing waters before, or that can see a
flaw in my logic, or that happens to know somebody, who knows somebody, that is
way into research and happens to have tons of money that they just don't know
what to do with. ;)

We believe in keeping as many doors open as we can.  Then we see what fits
right and move forward through whichever door(s) feels best.  Here are some of
the financing doors we see as possibly open to us right now, along with the
good, bad, and ugly of each.  We may try any or all of these, or we may decide
that none of them fits quite right.  Or perhaps we'll even have some long lost
relative come volunteer to simply finance the whole thing (though, I sort of
doubt the likelihood of the 'long lost relative' idea).  Whatever the end
choice(s), I don't want to rule any of them out, at least not yet, so I will
share them all and see where it goes from here.

Bank Loan 

: *Good:* We maintain control and will not have some investor telling us what
  to do. This is important since an investor may or may not be friendly with
  our open source or open business mentality.

: *Bad:* We have to pay it all back, starting right away, with interest and
  fees tacked on.  Also, banks like companies that already have a good track
  record---that's tough since we are brand new.
   
: *Ugly:* That whole decade long education thing has left us with little
  collateral and personally financing this for so long has not helped us
  build any big guarantees for a bank to look at as the “fall back on”
  motivation to loan to us.

Alternate Style Loans

: *Good:* Same control thing as a traditional loan, but with a greater
  likelihood to be approved.
  
: *Bad:* Again, we have to pay it back from the very
  beginning when cash will be tightest, but with potentially higher interest
  weighing things down.
  
: *Ugly:* Extra red tape sometimes gets involved.

Business Competitions

: *Good:* Essentially “free money” that could be used with no major strings
  attached and no draw on the company in the future to pay it back.
   
: *Bad:* They take time away from our other work to submit to, prepare for, and
  participate in and with nothing close to a guarantee. Really it feels a bit
  like gambling---something I am not fond of when it come to a business that
  matters this much to me.
  
: *Ugly:* Honestly, research may be hugely important to me and to an involved
  researcher, but business competitions are usually run and judged by business
  people. They are not necessarily involved in heavy lifting type of research.
  In other words, I fear we might not have great outcomes in those kind of
  events, just based on the “cool” factor challenge.

Angel Investor(s)

: *Good:* They are generally more comfortable with the risk involved in a
  collateral poor start-up and willing to wait to see rewards on their
  investment. Also, they can sometimes offer great moral support as well as
  connections to other folks that have already traveled this road (it's great
  to have amazing mentors---we already have many, but more would certainly not
  be a bad thing).
  
: *Bad:* It can be tough to find them or get their attention and there are
  legal costs involved that are discouraging at this point.
  
: *Ugly:* Since looking into funding options, I have heard more than one horror
  story of a highly overbearing or difficult to work with Angel---not super
  excited with that possibility.

Venture Capital

: *Good:* They have amazing networks of resources that could be extremely
  helpful. Plus, they are also used to the risks involved with our lack of
  prior financial history and they are generally willing to wait for the
  rewards on their investment to come in.
   
: *Bad:* They often want to invest huge amounts of money, requiring uber fast
  growth---something that just doesn't seem to fit right now. Also, they are
  more controlling of what we do and have much greater say in how things are
  handled. We are open and willing to pay attention to all suggestions, but not
  so excited to be directed by people that are essentially only in it for the
  money and not aware of or concerned with the needs of the research community.
  
: *Ugly:* They often require a sell-out at some future point in time in order
  to facilitate their highly lucrative “exit” from the business.  Plus, if
  things are not managed the way they want (again, our dedication to the open
  source and open business movements could be a problem for some), they could
  potentially kick us right out of our own company.  Those horror stories
  prompt much of my anxiety over the entire funding paradigm.

Crowdfunding

: *Good:* Crowdfunding, through things like Kickstarter, can provide amazing
  amounts of funding and support for a project. I love that the support likely
  comes from the community that wants us to succeed anyway!  It does not have
  to be “paid back” except through specified “rewards,” successful completion
  of the funded project, and doing amazing things, that we already want to do,
  with it for the community. I want to believe that if people from the
  community we plan to serve “invest” in us, they will naturally feel a part of
  our company and get involved in other ways too.

: *Bad:* I would not want to offer “rewards” that are hokey and of little to no
  value to the “investors.” At the same time, we can't offer rewards too
  astounding or the rewards themselves pull back too much of the raised funds
  to make it possible to accomplish what we need to.
  
: *Ugly:* There are people that think it's a hokey thing and I don't want to
  ever give the impression that we are doing any of this just for the sake of
  getting our hands on some quick cash. I sometimes wonder if asking for
  financial support from the community will actually turn people away from us
  (it's my old elementary school fund-raising insecurities coming back to haunt
  me I am sure).

Like I said, there are certainly other possibilities and I am not closing the
door on other options either. For now, though, that felt great to get all of
this down and out there. Thanks for letting me (not that I gave anyone much
choice) use this blog as a mental financial sounding board. Somehow that all
seems so much neater and more simple now that it's down in text. We feel pretty
sure of a few of these methods---one way or the other---but for the most part,
we are going to simply test a lot of doors and see which ones seem to fit. I'm
happy to keep you up to date as we step through or slam shut any of these
possibilities. :)
{: .conclusion }
