---
title: I'll Take Door Number...?
description: How should we seek funding?
kind: article
article_id: i-ll-take-door-number
author_name: Katie Chapman
created_at: 2012-05-02
updated_at: 2012-05-02
published: true
tags:
  - Funding
  - Decisions
---

There are some things in life that are "worth it" and some things that are not.
We believe that the ideas we are promoting and working to make possible are
"worth it." They are worth enough that we have essentially thrown all of our
time and finances to it for the last, ehem, unmentionably long time frame. We
feel grateful for the generous support of friends and family in our efforts,
both in occasional and appreciated financial contributions, and even more in
the cheer squad effect and the brave willingness to watch our brood of kids
from time to time while we have tended to business matters. Without the
amazingly prolific support of our closest loved ones, we could never have
reached this point. But here we are, on the verge of releasing our first
product and offering an open-source research platform for doing amazing
research and sharing it with the world. Life is amazing!

<!--MORE-->

For those that are not aware, I am still a college student. Or I suppose a more
accurate statement would be that I am *again* a college student. Chris has been
a student for the majority of the last decade and is still waiting to get that
final stamp of approval for a long awaited masters degree. Meanwhile we have
five fantastic kids (pardon the blatant bias). While conquering enough worlds
to make many people squeamish, we decided to build on a passion and a desire to
make a difference by creating Pentandra Research Solutions---a business that
openly works to build a solid research environment for truly collaborative,
in-depth research.

Now, lest you think us to be completely insane (which I am not completely sure
would be inaccurate---at least on some days), allow me to say that we have
started our own businesses previously during similarly complicated periods of
our life. However, there is a difference this time that is both exhilarating
and exceptionally intimidating. Funding. What a difference that one word makes.
Previously we started simple businesses that only had to support our very
bare-bones financial requirements for a specific period of time. All of those
businesses required very minimal cash investments to get them up and running
and next to zero capital to run them after that. Not so this time.

I could ramble about all of the various financial requirements of this
business, from web hosting costs to legal expenses, but I don't want to bore
you that badly. The biggest difference this time is that we feel compelled by
the timing of this venture. Now, _right now_, is the time to bring this into
reality. In order to do that we need to have more people involved.

So not only do we need to be able to survive as a family, but we also need to
support those other people as well. That is a huge ol' difference and it goes
beyond our bank account's ability to handle right now. We are so grateful to
have been able to bankroll things along this far, but we recognize that the
time has come to reach out. We need enough funding to get Geungle finished and
up into the cloud, not just running from our local servers.

We don't want this to be a hit-and-run business. We want to make sure that we
will be around to maintain support, continue to improve, and protect our
customers' data. We don't want to get into this just far enough to have people
starting to experience fully open and rich research and then need to devote our
time to some other job to pay the bills. Plus, we can't ask others to give up
their day job to help us start to move things full speed ahead if we do not
have the finances to see it through.

While I am sure some of you are either shocked or even disturbed at my candor,
I would rather have your eyes open to our reality, than protect my own ego or
some sense of corporate detachment when it comes to finances. We really are
open, just like our [Open Business page](/open/business/) says. We think that
the best people to help us figure out how to cover the needs of this business
are the ones that will most benefit from our success. Researchers that want
better ways to manage and share their research are our best allies.

We contemplated the "Who do we know that could hook us up with some cash for
getting this thing off the ground?" question many times. Unfortunately, we
don't run in circles that have tons of investing power and the circles we are
closest to are already helping in all kinds of ways and can't give much else.
I am not writing this article to beg for money from any particular reader, but
to use all possible readers as a springboard for our financing ideas. I would
love to hear back from any of you that have tread the startup financing waters
before, or that can see a flaw in my logic, or that happens to know somebody,
who knows somebody, that is way into research and happens to have tons of money
that they just don't know what to do with. ;)

We believe in keeping as many doors open as we can. When we see what fits right
we will move forward through whichever door(s) feels best.

## Financing Doors

Here are some of the financing doors we see as possibly open to us right now,
along with the good, bad, and ugly of each. We may try any or all of these, or
we may decide that none of them fits quite right. Or perhaps we'll even have
some long lost relative come volunteer to simply finance the whole thing
(though, I sort of doubt the likelihood of the *long lost relative* idea).
Whatever the end choice(s), I don't want to rule any of them out, at least not
yet, so I will share them all and see where it goes from here.

Bank Loan

: *Good:* We maintain control and will not have some investor telling us what
  to do. This is important since an investor may or may not be friendly with
  our open source or open business mentality.

: *Bad:* We have to pay it all back, starting right away, with interest and
  fees tacked on.  Also, banks like companies that already have a good track
  record---that's tough since we are brand new.

: *Ugly:* That whole decade long education thing and personally financing this
  business for so long has left us with little collateral for a bank to look at
  as the “fall back on” motivation to loan to us.

Alternate Style Loans

: *Good:* Same control thing as a traditional loan, but with a greater
  likelihood to be approved.

: *Bad:* Again, we have to pay it back from the very
  beginning when cash will be tightest, but with potentially higher interest
  weighing things down.

: *Ugly:* Extra red tape sometimes gets involved.

Business Competitions

: *Good:* Essentially “free money” that could be used with no major strings
  attached and no drain on the company in the future to pay it back.

: *Bad:* They take time away from our other work to submit to, prepare for, and
  participate in. They offer nothing close to a guarantee that we will win
  anything. Really it feels a bit like gambling---something I am not fond of
  when it come to a business that matters this much to me.

: *Ugly:* Honestly, research may be hugely important to me and to an involved
  researcher, but business competitions are usually run and judged by business
  people, not researchers. In other words, I fear we might not have great
  outcomes in those kind of events, just based on the “cool factor."

Angel Investor(s)

: *Good:* They are relatively comfortable with the risk involved in a
  collateral-poor startup and willing to wait to see rewards on their
  investment. Also, they can sometimes offer great moral support as well as
  connections to other folks that have already traveled this road (it's great
  to have amazing mentors---we already have many, but more would certainly not
  be a bad thing).

: *Bad:* It can be tough to find them or get their attention and there are
  legal costs involved that are discouraging at this point.

: *Ugly:* Since looking into funding options, I have heard more than one horror
  story of a highly overbearing or difficult to work with angel---not super
  excited with that possibility.

Venture Capital

: *Good:* They have amazing networks of resources that could be extremely
  helpful. Plus, they are also familiar with the risks involved with our lack
  of prior financial history and they are generally willing to wait for the
  rewards on their investment to come in.

: *Bad:* They often want to invest huge amounts of money, requiring uber-fast
  growth---something that just doesn't seem to fit right now. Also, they are
  more controlling of what we do and have much greater say in how things are
  handled. We are open and willing to pay attention to all suggestions, but not
  so excited to be directed by people that are essentially only in it for the
  money and not aware of or concerned with the needs of the research community.

: *Ugly:* They often require a sell-out at some future point in order to
  facilitate their highly lucrative “exit” from the business. Plus, if things
  are not managed the way they want (again, our dedication to the open source
  and open business movements as well as our diehard commitment to quality over
  quantity research could be a problem for some), they could potentially kick
  us right out of our own company. Those horror stories prompt much of my
  anxiety over the entire funding paradigm.

Crowdfunding

: *Good:* Crowdfunding, through things like [Kickstarter](http://kickstarter.com/),
  can provide amazing amounts of funding and support for a project. I love that
  the support usually comes from the community that wants the project to
  succeed anyway! It does not have to be paid back with cash, but with
  specified "rewards," successful completion of the funded project, and doing
  amazing things with it for the community (a self-imposed requirement). Plus,
  I want to believe that if people from the community "invest" in us, they will
  naturally feel a part of our company and get involved in other ways too.

: *Bad:* I would not want to offer "rewards" that are hokey and of little-to-no
  value to the "investors." At the same time, we can't offer rewards too
  astounding or the rewards themselves pull back too much of the raised
  funds---this would make it impossible to accomplish what we need to.

: *Ugly:* There are people that think crowdfunding is a hokey thing and I don't
  want to ever give the impression that we are doing any of this just for the
  sake of getting our hands on some quick cash. I sometimes wonder if asking
  for financial support from the community will actually turn people away from
  us (it's my old elementary school fundraising insecurities coming back to
  haunt me I am sure).

Like I said, there are certainly other possibilities and I am not closing the
door on other options either. For now, though, that felt great to get all of
this down and out there. Thanks for letting me (not that I gave anyone much
choice) use this blog as a mental financial sounding board. Somehow that all
seems so much neater and more simple now that it's down in text. We feel pretty
sure of a few of these doors---one way or the other---but for the most part, we
are going to simply test a lot of doors and see which ones seem to fit. I'm
happy to keep you up to date as we step through or slam shut any of these
possibilities. :)
{: .conclusion }
