---
title: Opening Knowledge
description: We need true open access to knowledge.
kind: article
author_name: Chris Chapman
created_at: 2015-09-18
updated_at: 2015-10-01
published: true
tags:
  - Connections
  - Essay
  - Joy
  - Open Research
  - Research Cases
  - Republic of Letters
  - Technology
  - Open Business
  - Growth
  - W3C
---

We blogged about [our mission a couple years ago], and it has been fascinating
to see how our understanding has grown over time.
{: .intro }

---

All that we do in this company is motivated by our [mission], which is:

> To open up the knowledge of the world, so that light and understanding will
> be more accessible to everyone.
{: .bq .grab }

_We live in the information age. Why does knowledge need to be opened up?_

Knowledge is trapped right now in books, on the Web, and in people's heads. If
our goal is to make _light and understanding_ more accessible to everyone, we
need more than _access_ to books, libraries and other repositories of
knowledge.  We need to lower or remove barriers to the transfer of knowledge
from one person to another. Transferring knowledge is harder than it needs to
be, often requiring a lot of explanatory background information because the
connections in logic of a particular nugget of knowledge are not linear.
Research, at its essence, is simply structured learning, and is the process of
connecting pieces of information together to create a new nugget of knowledge.
We need easier ways to share these nuggets of knowledge. We also need to be
able to share knowledge in more open, personal ways. Knowledge needs to be
accessible in whatever way people think.

A library in France is a good metaphor for how knowledge is trapped and
inaccessible right now. If you look at <a href="#fig:squarehead">the picture
below</a>, you notice that this library, officially named <span lang="fr">La
Tête au Carré</span> (The Square Head), looks like a well-formed classical
bust, up to the bottom lip. The rest is obscured by the opaque aluminum block
that is the top four stories of the library. Because it is covered with finely
perforated aluminum mesh, nobody can see into the library from the outside, but
the people inside can see out. It's hard to tell whether the library is
depicting someone male or female, old or young, happy or sad. Neither can you
tell what is in his or her mind, nor what he or she is thinking.

<figure id="fig:squarehead" class="img" property="schema:image" resource="#squarehead" typeof="schema:ImageObject">
  <meta property="schema:representativeOfPage" content="true"/>
  <img property="schema:contentUrl" src="square_head.jpg" class="static" alt="Tête carrée, or Square Head, a library in Nice, France" />
  <figcaption property="schema:caption" class="small"><a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/14382098@N03/4300141401/" lang="fr" title="Une tête au carré à Nice on Flickr"><b>Une tête au carré à Nice</b></a> (A square head in Nice) by <a lang="fr" property="cc:attributionName" rel="cc:attributionURL" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/14382098@N03/">Benoît Lesquerbault</a>, licensed under a <a rel="cc:license" href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/"><abbr title="Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic">CC-BY</abbr></a> license, is actually the seven-story administration building of the municipal library in <span property="schema:contentLocation">Nice, France</span>. The sculptor, Sacha Sosno, uses the art of obliteration to invite the viewer to imagine the rest the sculpture. <span class="icon-cc"></span><span class="icon-cc-by"></span></figcaption>
</figure>

<!--MORE-->

Libraries are repositories of knowledge. You could think of books, the Web, and
people as libraries. All of these things, especially each of us, are vast
repositories of knowledge! I'm not sure whether the sculptor, <a
href="http://www.sosno.com/">Sacha Sosno</a>, was trying to depict this, but to
me, <span lang="fr">La Tête au Carré</span> screams of the impenetrability of
the human mind. Even if we're able to discern all the visual features of the
heads of the people around us, it is still hard to share understanding with
each other. As much as it would be convenient, we can't peer into each others
minds, or send out packets of understanding to another. Our ability to
communicate knowledge is limited. We walk around and interact with each other
as if we know each other, yet so much of who we are is not revealed to the
people around us. We may not really be sure who we are ourselves! We try to
share our thoughts and discoveries with each other, but to do so we have to
translate these ideas into the much more limited medium of language. When we
are directly in the presence of others, we have other tools at our disposal,
such as gestures, expressions, inflection, and dynamics, but over long
distances we experience increasing barriers to communication, especially when
all we have to work with is prose. Prose gives the impression that it is
precise, but in practice leaves much open for interpretation.  Ambiguity is
easy to introduce, and can confuse not only people, but machines as well. And
even if we were perfect at our communication skills, people only share what
they want to share with others. Much of our knowledge and understanding remains
on the shelves, so to speak. And our [diminishing attention spans] make the
problem all the worse! Rather than being left to guess the meaning between the
lines, as Sosno's sculpture suggests, we need the ability to share what is in
our heads more directly.

In scholarly research the situation is more bleak. The research publication
process is too slow and isolated, not really having changed from what it was
<span class="oldstyle">350</span> years ago. Commercial publishers put research
articles behind paywalls, charging <span class="oldstyle">$30--40</span> for
access to each. Researchers get none of the profits. Even with access to an
article, very few of the underlying connections in logic are ever published,
especially when page limits constrain how much a researcher can share in the
first place. This makes it hard for people to reproduce or build upon the
research results. Even further, research that doesn't turn out as hoped is
normally _not_ published at all. While the researcher may remember the result,
the world doesn't. For all intents and purposes the research is _obliterated_,
which leads to a lot of duplication of work and wasted efforts. Talk about a
communications nightmare!  In many ways, [the way scholarly information used to
be shared (in the Republic of Letters)][Republic of Letters] is better than our
current situation---at least it was more open and participative. Currently,
even in the best of circumstances, we're only publishing a part of the picture,
like Sosno's sculpture above, leaving the rest up to the imagination.

I think it's interesting that the World Wide Web is [a graph of nodes and
edges][graph], but we as humans extract knowledge from it primarily by reading
documents.  While the Web is a vast improvement over the printing press, we
must constantly go through the process of translating prose into information,
and then connecting those pieces of information into knowledge in a way that
our minds can understand. And then to write a web page, we need to translate
our knowledge into prose that someone else can later disassemble and assimilate
in the same way. What would happen if we used the Web in a different way? If we
sidestepped this translation process and dealt with knowledge on the Web
directly?

Maybe my hope for the future has come from reading too much academic writing,
which much of the time doesn't deserve the distinction of prose. Most are not
enjoyable to read, and don't seem like they were very enjoyable to write in the
first place. Please don't misunderstand. There _is_ a place for well-written
prose! But situations exist, especially in some types of research, that are not
a good fit for the form. Prose can be added on top of the research like icing
on a cake, but intricate prose should not be required in order to share the
nuts and bolts of _knowledge creation_. Beyond that, our systems of citations
are rooted in a two-dimensional world, and have not been able grow beyond this
limitation. Footnotes seem to be the best tool that we currently have to
describe the connections between pieces of information, but are lousy at
preserving the context and meaning of those connections. There are huge
opportunities here to improve the quality of the research experience.

Research is currently assumed to be the domain of the scholarly elite. [In the
future], we see research as part of the everyday life of many types of people,
from many different backgrounds, contributing to the world's knowledge in many
different ways. You don't need to be a PhD to contribute meaningfully to the
progress of knowledge! Some people know the right questions to ask, and other
people are better at finding answers. Everyone knows different things and can
bring a unique perspective to a question. In general, we want to change how
research is done and perceived. We are creating a research counterculture. You
could compare what we are trying to achieve to the World Wide Web. In the early
<span class="oldstyle">90</span>'s, the Web was the domain of technical
academics.  Now the Web is cool, and everyone seems to be on the Web in some
form or fashion. Anyone can become a web developer, blogger, or contribute
something in some way, without anyone else's permission. Anyone—a curious
student to a professional scholar or a seasoned entrepreneur to an aspiring
researcher in a third-world country—should be able to share their journey of
discovery in a simple, open way. This mechanism should be simple enough to
track elementary questions and answers, and powerful enough to handle <a
href="#fig:alice">complex, data-intensive research</a>. It needs to open doors
for collaboration within a research field and bridge fields of knowledge that
have traditionally been isolated. We need something that allows anyone to
publish every bit of the journey, from the most random piece of evidence to the
most profound analysis in real time, as the research is progressing. And all
this research needs to be accessible not only to people, but to machines as
well.

<figure id="fig:alice" class="img" property="schema:image" resource="#alice" typeof="schema:ImageObject">
  <a property="schema:contentUrl" href="LRsaba_CERN_0212_00676.jpg" title="Click for maximum coolness"><img property="schema:thumbnail" src="LHR_alice.jpg" class="static" alt="People working on the ALICE detector at the Large Hadron Collider" /></a>
  <figcaption property="schema:caption" class="small">The <a href="http://cds.cern.ch/record/1436153"><abbr>ALICE</abbr> detector</a>, part of the Large Hadron Collider at <span property="schema:contentLocation">CERN</span>. Detectors along the LHC can produce <em>a lot</em> of data for research, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Worldwide_LHC_Computing_Grid" title= "Worldwide LHC Computing Grid on Wikipedia">about <span class="oldstyle">300</span> gigabytes per second</a>. Image copyright <span class="oldstyle">© <span property="schema:copyrightYear">2012</span>--2015</span> <span property="schema:copyrightHolder" resource="http://home.web.cern.ch/">CERN</span>. <a href="http://copyright.cern.ch" rel="schema:publishingPrinciples">Used by permission</a>.</figcaption>
</figure>

So why does knowledge need to be opened up? And what would be the benefit of
making light and understanding more accessible to everyone? We need a greater
ability to understand each other, especially over great distances and across
cultures. We need to take advantage of technology that can make it easier for
us to understand and explain difficult concepts and relationships. We need to
lower barriers to the sharing of knowledge so that light and understanding is
more accessible to more people. What will the effects of this be? I don't know,
but I know it will be good. More people will see eye to eye and understand each
other. More people will be able to be helped. Our understanding, individually
and collectively, of the world around us, its past and future, will improve
much faster than otherwise. What we're aiming for here is more than an
improvement of research communications---we're talking about a whole new way to
share knowledge!

And if we're serious about sharing knowledge, we need to be willing to expose
our minds to the world.
{: .conclusion }

[mission]: </company/#sec:mission> "Pentandra → Our Mission"
[our mission a couple years ago]: </blog/a-more-focused-mission/> "Pentandra → A More Focused Mission"
[graph]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graph_(mathematics)> "Graph on Wikipedia"
[diminishing attention spans]: <http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2012/mar/19/attention-span-internet-consumer> "Say it quick, say it well – the attention span of a modern internet consumer (on theguardian)"
[Republic of Letters]: </blog/introducing-research-cases/> "Pentandra → Introducing Research Cases"
[In the future]: </research/#sec:future> "Pentandra → The Future of Research"
*[CERN]: Organisation européenne pour la recherche nucléaire (English: European Organization for Nuclear Research)
*[LHC]: Large Hadron Collider
*[ALICE]: A Large Ion Collider Experiment
*[PhD]: Doctor of Philosophy
[^lhc_computing_grid]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Worldwide_LHC_Computing_Grid
