---
title: "Defining the Scholarly Commons: subtractable resources"
description: Is there a subtractable resource in your scholarly commons? Yes, there should be.
kind: vignette
author_name: Chris Chapman
created_at: 2017-04-20
updated_at: 2017-05-03
tags:
  - Defining the Commons
---

<figure id="fig:surfing-commons" class="img" property="schema:sharedContent" resource="#surfing_commons" typeof="schema:ImageObject">
  <link property="schema:representativeOfPage" resource="schema:True" />
  <img property="schema:contentUrl" class="static" data-no-retina alt="Waves coming in off Banzai Pipeline beach in Hawaii, with bystanders watching from the shore" src="Hawaii-Pipeline.jpg" />
  <figcaption property="schema:caption"><span property="schema:description">Waves are the subtractable resource of a surfing commons at the <span property="schema:contentLocation">Banzai Pipeline, off the coast of Oahu, Hawaii</span>.</span> Photo by <span property="cc:attributionName" class="sic">MUrra</span>, via <a rel="prov:hadPrimarySource" href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AHawaii-Pipeline.jpg">Wikimedia Commons</a>, and licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0">CC-BY-SA</a> license. <span class="icon-cc"></span><span class="icon-cc-by"></span><span class="icon-cc-sa"></span></figcaption>
</figure>

My thoughts on this, which I believe are consistent with commons theory and are
touched upon in [a blog post by Bruce Caron][collectives], is that a scholarly
commons will form because of a need---a need for understanding. People that
actually care about a certain knowledge will collect around a need to
understand and a desire to care for and further that knowledge in order to
satiate that need for understanding. This collective is the seed of a commons.
Discussions will ensue that will establish rules, traditions, and values
pertaining to how to deal with the shared resources of the commons, which will
include the active and latent knowledge of that field of study. Scholarly
commons can form around any type of knowledge. Scholarly commons can be nested
into multiple layers, either imitating the structure of the knowledge around
which it was created, or more likely, around the type of need it is trying to
fill.

The subtractable resource around which a scholarly commons forms is the moments
of discovery that reveal, bit by bit, the latent knowledge within that field of
study. In this definition, I'm using the term <dfn>discovery</dfn> very loosely
here to mean any new insight or understanding to the collective that aids in
further discovery. A discovery could be the enlightening answer to a
long-standing research question that changes our understanding of how the world
works. A discovery could also be something as subtle as finding the right
question to ask. I'm also separating the discovery from the knowledge that has
been discovered. The discovery---that enlightening moment of [eureka!]---is the
subtractable resource of the Scholarly Commons, and can be catalogued as such,
as it happened in some moment of time and will never happen again. It can be
subtracted from the set of all potential discoveries that remain within that
field of study. The knowledge that was revealed by that discovery, however, is
set free, for example, to become public.

<!--MORE-->

Ocean waves provide a more tangible illustration of this type of subtractable
resource. Even though it seems like there will be no end to the waves that
pummel the beach incessantly, each wave is unique and unrepeatable. Each wave
is the arithmetical result of a complex set of forces that have acted together
to produce its precise form of expression. Once one of these waves comes and
goes, it will never come again. In some locations, these waves are guarded and
protected, like in [the surfing commons off the Banzai Pipeline beach][surfing
commons], where rules describing how to use these scarce resources must be
followed if you want to play. There are just not enough waves to go around, and
surfers want to make the most of them when they happen. In a scholarly commons,
like the waves of the sea, these moments of discovery are a scarce resource.
Once a contribution is made, it cannot be made again in quite the same way.
Once a new understanding is revealed to a collective, it cannot be discovered
to that collective anew.

If the moments of discovery are the subtractable resource of the commons, what
is being done with these resources right now? Surely they still exist, but they
are being privatized by researchers who lay claim to the ground, thinking of it
as their own exclusive property, hoping that others will not stumble onto their
territory before they have fully harvested, processed, and packaged the new
knowledge for resale. Perhaps this is a pessimistic perception, but why else
would researchers not share what they're working on but for fear of being
scooped?

The culture of the commons views things differently. Discoveries are still your
own, but there is no reason to hide your research from others. In actuality, it
is much more likely that the opposite is happening. There is every reason to go
out and *proclaim* the ground that you see so that other people can build on
top of it---not just for your own sake, but for the sake of everyone else in
the world that could be using your contribution right now. If your whole
process is open for everyone to see, there is not the fear of others taking
something away from you or claiming they have discovered something before you,
but a trust that others will come to help uncover that which was before hidden.

Though these contributions are smaller and more fine-grained, they are not
half-baked. Each contribution is identifiable universally and independent in
its own sphere of influence, the only barrier of entry being access to the
Internet and an ability to contribute in some way. Participating in the
Scholarly Commons comes with more of a sense of immediate gratification, more
opportunities of service, and many more ways to contribute.

And just as the surfing commons is not as much about managing the _water_ as it
is about managing the _waves_, if the subtractable resource of scholarly
commons is really the discoveries, then the Scholarly Commons is not as much
about 'managing the outputs of research at every stage of the research process'
as it is about managing the _process of discovery_. Though this difference may
seem subtle and insignificant, this change in focus _exposes the
subtractability of discoveries in a more efficient way_, meaning that
discoveries will happen in the open for everyone to watch unfold in realtime,
rather than happening privately and only hearing about them later on. At any
point in time, anyone that desires to contribute will have the option to
participate directly in the unfolding. Not only will this accelerate research
in an unprecedented way, it will also affect the entire approach to defining
the Scholarly Commons, distributing power from the hands of a few to the hands
of many, and making scholarly commons of much greater benefit to mankind.

[collectives]: <https://cybersocialstructure.org/2016/10/03/think-of-science-like-an-incurable-intellectual-disease/> "Think of science like an incurable intellectual disease, by Bruce Caron"
[surfing commons]: <http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/surfing-commons-hawaii>
